D.C. Circuits
In this article we will learn about D.C. Circuits. We will get to know

The basic ideas of what constitutes a series circuit and a parallel circuit.
Current is equal at all points along a series circuit and e.m.f. = sum of p.d. across all components.
Current in main path = sum of the current in all parallel paths, and p.d. across all parallel paths are equal.
The details covered in the article are as per the requirements of the Secondary 4 Physics class.

Introduction To D.C. Circuits
The D.C. in D.C. circuits stands for Direct Current. For D.C.,  current only flows in one direction, i.e. from the positive terminal to the negative terminal of the power source.

The opposite of D.C. current is A.C. current and it stands for Alternating Current.
 
Electromotive Force(e.m.f.)

Before directly diving into the circuits, let us be clear about a concept called electromotive force.

Identical Cells In Series
When identical cells are arranged in series, the resultant e.m.f. is the sum of all the e.m.f.s of the cells.

In the above image, both cells, each of 1.5 V, are arranged in series. The resultant e.m.f. is the sum of the e.m.f. of the two cells which is 3.0 V (=1.5+1.5).   

Identical Cells In Parallel
When identical cells are arranged in parallel, the resultant e.m.f. Is equal to that of a single cell.

In the above image, both cells, each of 1.5 V, are arranged in parallel. The resultant e.m.f. will be the e.m.f. of a single cell, which is 1.5 V.

Series vs Parallel Circuits

Series Circuits:
The resultant e.m.f. is the sum of all the e.m.f.s of the cells.
The components are connected one after another in a single loop.
There is only one path through which electric current can flow.
The current at every point is the same.
I_source=I1=I2=....=In

Parallel Circuits:
The resultant e.m.f. is equal to that of a single cell.
The components are connected to the cell in 2 or more loops.
There are several paths through which electric current can flow.
The sum of individual currents in each of the branches is equal to the main current.
I_source=I1+I2+....+In